Well, say your name again and tell me about your
father. Well, my name is... Now? Yes. My name is
Graviela Gámez. Yes. And I am the daughter of Juan
Gámez Sr. and my mother, Mrs. Ramona R. Gámez. My
mother was Reyes for her father. I am Reyes Gámez.
Well, my father was a military man in Mexico when he
was a carranza. He was a
carrancista. They called them carrancistas. He
was a carrancista soldier in Mexico. That's why
they came to give the rosary, because that's where
all the troops were stationed. And that's when
they fought and won Matamoros. That's why from
Ciudad Victoria to Matamoros is Tamaulipas. It's
the state of Tamaulipas, Mexico. Because they won
the war back then. I don't know when the war
started. I think it was 1910. It was the first year.
Well, it was when I was born. I was a baby. Not a very
small baby. I was a girl. I was born in 1910.
I was born on March 18. And my father was in the
militia, in the war. He was... Soldado. ¿Para qué
razón entró? Bueno, pues como aquí, you know, lo
llama el gobierno, tiene que ir. Y allá lo llamó el
gobierno, aunque eran hombres familiares, pero
tuvieron que, necesidad de ir, porque eran,
tenían, llevaban los soldados, los reclutaban
como aquí. Es la razón que fueron. Aquí hay muchos
jóvenes que no quieren ir y tienen que ir. Because
the government calls them. What can they do with
the government? They have to go to the government
to serve the country. And in Mexico, it's the same
thing. That's why my father was a militant. He was a
lieutenant. He was a very humble man, but he did
everything very correctly. My uncles, my
mother's brothers, were also soldiers at that
time. One was the clarinet player, you know, the
one who plays the clarinet so that all the soldiers
get up. And the other, my uncle, the other, José,
was the one who carried the flag. Yes. But there in
Mexico, my mother said, all the soldiers were all
horsemen, they walked on horses, you know. They
were horsemen. They were horsemen. That's how
they were called, horsemen. And the ones who
brought the other one, as they say, Pancho V was
very brave. But all of his poor soldiers were
brought on foot. They fought, all on foot. But your
father was a horse rider. Oh, my father, yes. My
father rode horses, all of them. They were horse
riders. They were horse soldiers. That's the
name. Horse soldiers, not infantry. The infantry
are the ones who go on foot, the poor ones. Like your
father. Your family wasn't from the poor. Well, my
father was a farmer. Yes. A man who worked in the
fields. But they don't call them labores here.
They call them potreros. For example, the owner
says, I'm going to take a look at the work. And in
Mexico, he says, I'm going to take a look at the
potrero to see how the land is so they can start
working. That's what they say in Mexico. Well, my
mom used to tell us. I wasn't very young. I looked at
how my father worked in Mexico, but my mother
didn't. My father used to talk about why they came
here to make the rosary. And from there they
worked, they came here to work. And then my father
sent to bring my mother to Padilla. He wrote to her,
he told her to get ready because he was going to
bring her. You know,
sobrinos
y familia de la... sisters and all that. But the
elders of the family, the parents, the older
sisters, they all died. My mother has a sister. We
have an aunt in Mexico, in Padilla. She's my
mother's sister. She came here about 8
or 9 years ago. Yes, because she came after my
father and my mother
died. She came to see us. She has a lot that came and
she didn't come. But she lives. She writes to us
here and there. She sends us a letter. So that she
knows about us. It's the whole family that we have
on my mother's side. What kind of stories did your
father tell about his days as a soldier? Soldier? I
don't know, because I think he only talked to my
mother. I think. We were younger. Yes. The little
ones don't pay attention to what the parents or the
mother talk about. Yes. They're going to play, or
they're going to do what they're told to do. No.
Yes, he was a soldier. He fought in Mexico. He
fought here. I have three nephews in the service.
One was in Thailand. The other one was in Thailand a
month ago. He was there for a year. And the other
one... But the revolution was especially hard,
right? Yes,
my mom
says so.
And what did your mother do during those years when
your father was a soldier? Well, they left them
there in the house. They left them there and when
they could, they sent them money so they could buy
their food. That was all. They didn't go with him?
No, they stayed there in the farm, in the house. But
they were very afraid. Because in Mexico, it
wasn't the same war as here. In Mexico, suddenly,
in the middle of the night, all the people were
sleeping, peaceful. The people who were
civilians, peaceful. And suddenly, when they
woke up, the soldiers arrived. That's why my
mother was very afraid. All the families, all of
them. My grandmothers cried a lot for them because
My father's grandmother had already passed away,
but my grandmother lived with my mother because
she worked with her two children and her
son-in-law, my father, in the war. Many families,
all the poor families, their husbands, their
brothers, their children did not come. In the
militia? Yes. In Mexico they say in the militia,
those who are in the war, they tell us, you're in the
war, or you're a soldier, or you're in the militia,
or you're in the militia, you're a soldier. A
soldier. A soldier is a soldier who fights with
weapons. It was very hard. My mother said that the
war in Mexico was very hard. Very, very hard. And
when...
No, it was in 1909.
When there was an abduction in Mexico. Yes. They
named him Cyclone. Yes. In what year? In 1909. In
1909. It was before the war. Yes, I think so. It was
when my grandmother died because she was very
scared. It was when my... Mi hermana chiquita, no,
yo creo fue menos después, porque mi hermana nació
en 1905, el 25 de febrero. Mi hermana es la que está
en el pueblo, la mayor de la familia.
Y la inundación esa fue en 1909,
un año antes que naciera yo. Because my sister was
brought up in Chiquita. And my mother says that it
didn't rain. Suddenly it didn't rain, it was just
that the water came to the houses and they came to
warn us. That there was a very big crescent. Like
when the river comes out here. My mother told me
that the trees in the houses did not look so good.
And they were very afraid because my aunt, my
father's little sister, had gone to the ranch with
one of her sisters and my grandmother, my father's
mother. And there, in the ranch, the crescent
fished them. And they started to warn us to leave
the houses. They went up to where they were very
high, high, if not the highest, because the water
was coming up very cold. And my aunt said that when
they left the house, she would give the water to
Sina. And she brought a baby of a month of birth, my
aunt, my little sister and my father. And I know
that they left, and they left where there were high
and high, and the more bad it was, the water was here
and here. In the body? Yes, they were walking
through the mountain, and then there were some
very large trees, and a man who was their
brother-in-law, a brother of a brother-in-law of
my uncle and my father, he was a very good swimmer.
So he put up a lot of sticks and made them into
sticks. And all the families went up there. He said
there were 30 families who spent three days there.
Three days? 30 families? Yes, on those sticks. And
my mother, my grandmother, was going to take my
mother's baby, my little sister. They brought
something to give to the children. My grandmother
cooked for them. She said, God, where are we going?
We are going to cook something for these children.
They cooked rice, you know, and they put all the
juice in a jar to bring to the children. Bebitos to
give them. Because my grandmother took my
mother's bebito. My little sister had a bebito.
She was a month or two months old. And there they
spent three days and four nights on top of the
sticks. My mother here in the farm and other women,
all the families of the other women, crying
because they didn't know if they had drowned or
not. My mother said that they passed the trees, the
rivers gathered, all the rivers. The river, I
don't know what that river is called, that is in
Padilla. I don't know its name, it has a name. And
there's a river that my mom says is very big, and
that river grows all the time with a lot of water.
It's called the Corona River. They got together
and all the water came. It was when they say that...
That water came from Tocante, they say that a hill
was blown up. I don't know what it is in Monterrey,
that has a lot of water. And it blew up. That was the
flood that happened. I said, mom, there were a lot
of people who had no houses. And they had adobe
houses, you know, adobe houses, you know, the ones
they had. And the water would get to the shore like
this, because the river was very close. They said
that the waves of water would come and they would do
like this. And it got all wet, but they said, mom, we
didn't think it would get wet at all. The only thing
that made us strong was your father and my little
creature and your mother and all the people. There
were 30 families and all of them were in the mosques
up there. Yes. When it started to go down, I saw the
mosques and the trees. I saw that the mosques, the
trees, only the tips of the branches were removed.
Yes. It was a very ugly, very ugly, very big, very
big, at that time, my mother. And that's when it
started, when they saw that they started to go down
a little bit. And then, between more and more,
another day, it got lower and lower, so that man
went down, because he was very good at swimming.
And he said, let's see if I can reach Plan. We
reached Plan. We looked for a way to cross the
river, to see if we could cross over to Papadilla.
They go, and he went down and reached a little bit of
Plano. And we reached Plano, and it was him, and
another man, and a brother of my mother's. And my
grandmother didn't want him to leave because she
thought he was going to drown. And he said, you're
going to drown, Maximiano. No, no, Grandma, no,
no, my son. May God help us. And they left. And they
went to swim there. My mom said that they arrived
like at 3 in the afternoon, in the middle of the
water. But they arrived to see how the people were
doing and to give them reason. And they said that
they were all crying, all the women were crying.
Some for their children, some for their husbands,
some for their sisters, for their daughters. And
then they arrived and said, well, where did they
come from? Where did they come from? Where did they
come from? We have them there, don't take care of
them, they're good. But we came to bring them food,
because there are those innocent people without
food. And now the children are small. But when they
went out there to Padilla, where the $100 store
was, he said that he already gave them the water
here, and that was going down there. And then they
left, they went to talk to the administrator, and
he sent a lot of people, the administrator, so that
they could save those families. And there were
many people, men, to such an extent that when they
arrived and then from there they were going to
bring them, to cross them one by one, to bring them.
And on the shore that they knew was on the shore of
the river, there they had some skiff to cross with
the families. And that's how they crossed them.
And my aunt didn't want to go down because she was
afraid. She was the first baby she had. And when she
went down, the baby fell into the water. my aunt's
baby, and she screamed, my aunt was very angry, and
my aunt went to grab the baby, but she didn't know
how to swim, so she caught it. Then the other lady
grabbed the baby and took it out. It didn't drown,
but it did drown. And that was when my grandmother,
my mother and my father got very scared and died.
They died of pure heart attack. She saw a lot of
water. She said she didn't see the trees. You
couldn't see the low trees. Only the tall ones. And
they spent three days and four nights in that. She
said they had the pieces in the water. But the
sticks that the gentlemen put were very solid.
They tied them very solid. It was as if they were up
there. And so many days. My mother would tell us,
and I don't even want to remember, but normally I
tell them to know how we suffered. How we suffered.
Your father suffered with his mother in Tantahui,
with your aunt, and your other aunt. Two sisters of
my father were there. My father and my
grandmother.
And my mother here alone. and my grandmother, my
mother's mother, they were here in Hacienda
Dolores. I mean, just waiting for them to tell them
that they had drowned, because they couldn't,
because many drowned, my mother, many people
drowned. Because they took the whole houses, they
took the houses, they went through the middle of
the river, going around the houses. Many people
went inside, they drowned. That's why they were
afraid, and they were afraid of, They were afraid
of them here, and they were afraid of them there.
They didn't know where they were or how they were.
They didn't know if they would have been taken by
the water. My mom said it was very heavy. They said
it was a cyclone, but it didn't rain much. It
started to rain and it stopped, but the water kept
coming up and up and up until it covered some
houses. It didn't go up there because it was too
high in the hacienda. They said it was too high. It
was too high. In the hacienda too? In the hacienda
Dolores. They said it only went up to a certain
part. And it went up. And very little, to some
houses it went up, because it was too low. I don't
even want to remember, but I'll tell you so you know
how we suffered. We suffered because your father
left and took your little sister, your
grandmother, because she took good care of her,
and your grandmother, and your other aunt, and
your other aunt, and a brother of mine, and the rest
were well-known families, families from the
ranch that were there, they all got together. But
my mom said, well, how could your grandmother not
be dead? She said that after two months of that, my
grandmother died. Because she was very surprised
to be so alone and to see so much water. And she
thought that just as they were there, there would
be those who were there. And my grandmother died.
The mother of
my father. My father was a very good man. This
cyclone here in Corpus Christi in 19...1919? Oh,
19. Do you remember this? No, I don't remember. I
was more in the middle. How old was that little
girl? I think I had like... Nine years, more or
less. About eight years. Eight years, yes. But I
don't see much, because I was with an aunt of mine,
and we spent time in a house, but she was at a table,
like, oh, there's a girl, and there we were, me and
another little sister of mine. So we didn't see
much. I know Celia, who came now. Yes, yes. I didn't
see her. No? The other one that came, the first one,
what's her name? Celia. Celia, but she came...
Yes, but another one came. The first one. What's
the other one called? She also has a name of a woman.
The first one, and then came Celia. Celia was the
one who... Well, I didn't see her. No? No, because I
worked with Mrs. Kepp, Miss Kepp. So she was in a
small closet, and we went up there because her
house was very elegant. Her house was very
elegant,
very tall. Like this one, it had a floor down and a
floor up. And they started to fall, like those
windows, all down. All of them. And the water
inside was so high. She started to come in and she
grabbed me and two other boys that she had and the
little boy. We got into a closet and she said, no,
don't go because I don't know what's going to
happen. She said, if you want to go home, don't kill
us. Don't kill the girls. So we were there, in the
closet, locked up. So I didn't forget how I was.
After it was all over, we went out to see, and on the
streets I saw pure things like this, electric
coffee machines, bread toasters, well, full of
pure trash on the streets, from where the houses
were. Very terrible. And I don't
forget.
And the other day they said that a tornado was
coming and I said, playing with my sister, ah,
well, let Pabelo come. I've never seen a chubasco
like that. And Jonevitas, as I remember, said,
well, yes, well, he left a lot of everything, a lot
of bodies, it was pure board, wherever, in the
streets. Do you have fear of other things? Oh, yes.
Yes, a lot? Well, yes, because that's how Corpus
Christi was, very cheap. There are many houses
that have just been built, and it's been three
years since I've been here. My brother lives here
on this side. His house, his blankets, his
clothes, all the clothes that they put on were well
made because they had ironed them. The mattresses
and the curtains didn't fit at all. The doors
didn't fit at all. The windows, just the doors. My
brother didn't fit at all. He was very scared. They
said he was screaming a lot. He was screaming a lot.
He grabbed the smallest one and he squeezed her.
And he has one. And the girl got married. She just
started to see the water and the doors opened and
she fainted. Because he was very scared. She
fainted and she was fine. Super. And Pancho was
already struggling with her and Manuel with the
two little ones here, grabbing them. and a little
girl and a daughter who were there with him. I also
had three of them. And then I couldn't attend to the
doors, and I said, Manuel, let the doors be taken
away, just don't let a creature get in. I take care
of my children. God help us, all the clothes go
away. Yes, the pieces of sheets and mattresses
were on the side of the street. God didn't leave
them anything. I said, well, thank God that he
brought the clothes, but they didn't do anything,
I don't see any of his family. No one turned around.
Is it possible to make preparations before the
next cyclone? Is there anything for people to do? I
don't know what they can do. They have given many
instructions on the radio to say how to do it. What
can they do? They were saying that when a tornado
comes, if they think that their house is not very
powerful to resist that air, that they go out into
the street where there are no trees, and if they see
a very strong storm of air, because that's what
comes most in those tornadoes, air than water,
right? that they fall on the ground and get really
strong. On the ground, better. Because in the
house, a stick falls. That's how people get
killed. A stick or something falls and hits them. A
window frame. That's what the man says when he
gives the advice for hurricanes, for... For
tornadoes. But tornadoes are ugly because they go
around like this. It's a... It's a whirlwind,
right? Yes. A whirlwind of air. A whirlwind. Yes,
it's a whirlwind. There are hurricanes and... The
hurricane is a hurricane air, but it also brings a
lot of water. Yes. And these tornadoes do bring
water, but not a lot. What they bring is a lot of air,
like this, back and forth. Yes. And after it
passes, there's water. Yes. That's what happens.
It seems that a tornado is worse than a chubaco. A
chubaco? Chubasco. What is this? Chubasco is a
very strong water with a lot of air that sweeps the
trees like this. Do you see how the cell fell? Yes,
it's the same thing as a hurricane. Chubasco and
hurricane are the same thing. It's just that the
hurricane is stronger because the air comes much
stronger. The hurricane. And the chubasco comes
strong, but the air comes with water. So it's
not... It's not that strong because in parts when
the water falls, it cuts the air a little, you know?
It cuts the air a little. And the hurricane, no, it
comes sweeping everything because the water
comes as strong as the air. It's almost the same as
the tornado, the hurricane. The hurricane is
strong. And yesterday they were saying, talking,
reporting that It's a tropical storm. Tropical is
very strong water and air, like a hurricane, the
tropical one. Well, now they give names to people.
A friend of mine, She has a sister named Celia. I
said to Celia, I don't love you. I said to Dred,
playing, I don't love you. She said, why? Because
your name is Celia. And Celia was very terrible
here with us. How could she leave us? She left a lot
of people without... My kids, where I worked, they
had here, to Sandia, to one side of El Naranjo. They
have a ranch, not very big, about 40 acres. And they
had a very nice trailer. Y le estaban pegando
corredor de pura tela para cuando iban a pasar día
de campo. Estaba muy fresco y no se metían los
zancudos ni nada. Pues no las dejó nada. Se las
barrió, las trae, las contó y todo. Hace una semana
que le había ido a poner cortinas nuevas y todo para
ahora que venga el summer para ir a pasar una semana
allá o dos. Le dijo, y te vamos a llevar a ti también,
dijo, para que te vayas con nosotros a pasear allá.
Well, Celia came and she didn't leave anything for
them. The pots, the pans, the pans, they were found
in the labors buried in the ground. And she didn't
leave anything for them. A house that they had,
they lost a lot, those gentlemen. Their house was
almost all sold out. And only the room where I
slept, where the child slept, He didn't break a
window, he didn't get wet, he didn't do anything.
But where the girls slept, where the lady slept,
there was nothing left. He had a big mirror, like
this one. He had the sign to wash himself. Like
this, the big mirror. There was nothing left. Las
cortinas, las ventanas, nomás los cuadros sin
vidrio, las ventanas, las cortinas, todas las
sacó, las bolas y las aventó para afuera. Todo. Y la
que tenían en por el antes para ir a pasar días de
campo, cuando iban a pescar, la señora dice que
nomás un montón de madera. Ellos perdieron mucho.
He became very bad, despite the fact that he lost a
lot of money. He's a doctor, however he wants to
call it. He already has all his land, and he loses
money, however he wants to call it. That's the
money he spends, right? To buy that. I used to cry a
lot there, when I was in my room. Don't cry, your
people are good at saying yes. But I don't know how
they are doing. And I don't know my house. He said my
house didn't fall. Nothing fell. He took a window.
He broke a glass window and took a cloth. The doors,
at the time, like three months or four months after
it had happened, they started to break down due to
the humidity of the water. They started to fall,
the doors, but it was all. I saw how it was, and the
roof from above, from outside, it also started to
fall, the one that was supposed to be on the roof.
But for it to fall, no. or that my bed or my things
would get wet. They didn't get wet. And a lady, a
young lady, who wanted a house that was almost the
same and with the same accompaniment, they didn't
have anything left. They only had a chair, like
this one here, a chair like this one that was
standing. That was all that was left. In my house.
And all the people say, why was she so lucky? She
didn't even get her house wet. And the man says,
Chihuahua, look what a lucky girl. We have a lot of
boards. And mine doesn't. But maybe mine has a lot
of trees. They say that's why. That the trees
helped her a lot. how to stop the air, because there
is a tree on this side, there are some oranges on
this side, and on this side, I had, since I moved in,
those little trees were born, when my father and
mother lived, they were like this, little ones,
they were born, and they were made like this, They
were very curious. They grew together, very
tangled. And when Celia took them out, she took one
with all the roots and the other one was left there.
But it was all the damage she did. The tree fell on
the edge of the roof of the house and took a big piece
of that board that was thrown at the house by the
edge. It was all the damage that he did to my house.
The window that fell, the fabric, the glass that
broke, and the tree that he took out, he took it out
with three roots. And he took it out. But he was very
curious, he looked at me like that, and I told him
how I was. Because they were born together. And
they were made like that. That's how he was. Let me
say it.
I was talking and cutting this because I have to cut
it. I'm going to make enchiladas. You already ate.
What? You already ate.